docs/PLUGINSV3/WEBSITE.md, before:

# Website Plugin Registry Implementation

This document describes the server-side implementation for the plugin registry using a git-based approach.

---

## Overview

The plugin registry uses a **git repository as the database**. No traditional database is needed - the registry is a JSON file in a git repository, managed by a CLI tool.

**Key principle:** Git is the source of truth.

---

## Architecture

### Components

1. **picard-plugins-registry** (Git repository)
   - Contains `plugins.json` (the registry)
   - CLI tool to manipulate registry
   - Validation scripts
   - CI/CD for validation

2. **picard.musicbrainz.org** (Website)
   - Serves `plugins.json` at `/api/v3/plugins.json`
   - Displays plugin browser (HTML pages)
   - Fetches from GitHub (cached)

3. **Picard Client**
   - Downloads `plugins.json` from website
   - Caches locally
   - Uses for plugin discovery and blacklist checking

### Data Flow

```
1. Admin runs: registry plugin add <url> --trust community
   ↓
2. CLI updates plugins.json in local git repo
   ↓
3. Admin commits and pushes to GitHub
   ↓
4. GitHub hosts the JSON file
   ↓
5. Website fetches from GitHub (cached)
   ↓
6. Website serves at /api/v3/plugins.json
   ↓
7. Picard downloads and caches
```

---

## Repository Structure

### picard-plugins-registry

```
picard-plugins-registry/
├── plugins.json              # The registry (generated/managed)
├── registry_lib/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── cli.py               # CLI argument parsing
│   ├── registry.py          # Registry file management
│   ├── plugin.py            # Plugin operations
│   ├── blacklist.py         # Blacklist operations
│   ├── manifest.py          # MANIFEST.toml fetching/parsing
│   ├── utils.py             # Utilities (derive_plugin_id, timestamps)
│   └── picard/              # Files copied from Picard
│       ├── constants.py     # Trust levels, categories
│       └── validator.py     # MANIFEST validation
├── tests/                    # Unit tests
├── pyproject.toml           # Python project config (uv)
├── uv.lock                  # Dependency lock file
├── README.md
└── .github/
    └── workflows/
        └── ci.yml           # CI validation
```

**Note:** `constants.py` and `validator.py` are copied from Picard to keep the tool standalone.

---

## Registry CLI Tool

### Command Structure

```bash
# Plugin management
registry plugin add <git-url> --trust <level> [--categories <cats>] [--refs <refs>]
registry plugin update <plugin-id> [--ref <ref>]
registry plugin edit <plugin-id> [--trust <level>] [--categories <cats>] [--git-url <url>]
registry plugin redirect <plugin-id> <old-url> [--remove] [--list]
registry plugin remove <plugin-id>
registry plugin list [--trust <level>] [--category <cat>] [--verbose]
registry plugin show <plugin-id>

# Ref management (separate from plugin)
registry ref add <plugin-id> <ref-name> [--description <desc>] [--min-api-version <ver>] [--max-api-version <ver>]
registry ref edit <plugin-id> <ref-name> [--name <new-name>] [--description <desc>] [--min-api-version <ver>] [--max-api-version <ver>]
registry ref remove <plugin-id> <ref-name>
registry ref list <plugin-id>

# Blacklist management
registry blacklist add [--url <url>] [--uuid <uuid>] [--url-regex <pattern>] --reason <reason>
registry blacklist remove [--url <url>] [--uuid <uuid>]
registry blacklist list
registry blacklist show [--url <url>] [--uuid <uuid>]

# Utilities
registry validate
registry stats
```

### Usage Examples

**Add a plugin:**
```bash
cd picard-plugins-registry

# Add new community plugin (uses default ref: main)
registry plugin add https://github.com/user/awesome-plugin \
    --trust community \
    --categories metadata

# Output:
# Fetching MANIFEST.toml from https://github.com/user/awesome-plugin (ref: main)...
# Plugin: Awesome Plugin
# UUID: 12345678-1234-4234-8234-123456789abc
# Authors: John Doe
# API: 3.0
#
# Added plugin 'awesome-plugin' to registry

# Add plugin with custom branch
registry plugin add https://github.com/user/old-plugin \
    --trust community \
    --refs master

# Add plugin with multiple refs and API versions
registry plugin add https://github.com/user/multi-version-plugin \
    --trust community \
    --refs 'main:4.0,picard-v3:3.0-3.99'

# The registry will contain:
{
  "refs": [
    {
      "name": "main",
      "min_api_version": "4.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "picard-v3",
      "min_api_version": "3.0",
      "max_api_version": "3.99"
    }
  ]
}

# Validate
registry validate

# Commit
git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Add plugin: Awesome Plugin"
git push
```

**Update plugin metadata:**
```bash
# Update from default ref (first ref or main)
registry plugin update awesome-plugin

# Update from specific ref
registry plugin update awesome-plugin --ref develop

# Note: UUID must match or update will fail
```

**Edit plugin:**
```bash
# Change trust level
registry plugin edit awesome-plugin --trust trusted

# Change categories
registry plugin edit awesome-plugin --categories metadata,ui

# Change git URL (when plugin permanently moves)
registry plugin edit awesome-plugin --git-url https://github.com/neworg/awesome-plugin

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Promote awesome-plugin to trusted"
git push
```

**Manage refs:**
```bash
# Add a ref
registry ref add awesome-plugin develop \
    --description "Development branch" \
    --min-api-version "4.0"

# Edit ref (update description, API versions, or rename)
registry ref edit awesome-plugin develop --max-api-version "4.99"
registry ref edit awesome-plugin develop --name beta

# List refs
registry ref list awesome-plugin

# Remove ref
registry ref remove awesome-plugin develop

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Add develop ref to awesome-plugin"
git push
```

**Manage redirects:**
```bash
# Add redirect when plugin moves
registry plugin redirect awesome-plugin https://github.com/olduser/old-repo

# List redirects
registry plugin redirect awesome-plugin --list

# Remove redirect
registry plugin redirect awesome-plugin https://github.com/olduser/old-repo --remove

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Add redirect for moved plugin"
git push
```

**Blacklist a plugin:**
```bash
# Blacklist by UUID (recommended - blocks plugin at all URLs)
registry blacklist add --uuid 12345678-1234-4234-8234-123456789abc \
    --reason "Malicious plugin"

# Blacklist by URL
registry blacklist add --url https://github.com/badactor/malware \
    --reason "Contains malicious code"

# Blacklist entire organization
registry blacklist add --url-regex "^https://github\\.com/badorg/.*" \
    --reason "Compromised account"

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Blacklist malicious plugin"
git push
```

---

## Implementation Details

### Key Files

**registry_lib/plugin.py:**
- `add_plugin()` - Add plugin with duplicate checking (UUID, URL, ID)
- `update_plugin()` - Refresh metadata from MANIFEST with UUID validation
- `_parse_refs()` - Parse refs string (e.g., "main:4.0,picard-v3:3.0-3.99")
- `_sync_optional_fields()` - Helper for optional MANIFEST fields

**registry_lib/registry.py:**
- `Registry` class - Load/save JSON, find plugins, sort by ID
- `add_plugin()` - Append plugin to registry
- `remove_plugin()` - Remove plugin by ID
- `add_blacklist()` / `remove_blacklist()` - Manage blacklist

**registry_lib/manifest.py:**
- `fetch_manifest()` - Fetch MANIFEST.toml from GitHub raw URL
- `validate_manifest()` - Validate using Picard's validator

**registry_lib/utils.py:**
- `derive_plugin_id()` - Derive ID from git URL (removes prefixes)
- `now_iso8601()` - Generate ISO 8601 timestamps with Z suffix

**registry_lib/cli.py:**
- `get_plugin_or_exit()` - Helper for plugin lookup with error handling
- Command functions for all CLI operations
- Argument parsing with argparse

### Duplicate Detection

When adding a plugin, the system checks for duplicates:

1. **Git URL** - Most direct duplicate (same repository)
2. **UUID** - Prevents same plugin at different URLs
3. **Plugin ID** - Prevents derived ID collisions

All checks include the existing plugin ID in error messages for clarity.

### Validation

The `validate` command checks:
- JSON syntax
- Duplicate IDs, UUIDs, URLs
- Required fields present
- Trust levels valid
- Categories valid

### Testing

- 53 unit tests covering all operations
- Tests use temporary registry files
- Mock MANIFEST fetching for speed
- Pre-commit hooks run tests automatically

---

## CI/CD Validation

### GitHub Actions Workflow

```yaml
# .github/workflows/ci.yml
name: CI

on:
  pull_request:
  push:
    branches: [main]

jobs:
  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - uses: astral-sh/setup-uv@v3

      - name: Install dependencies
        run: uv sync

      - name: Run tests
        run: uv run pytest

      - name: Validate registry
        run: uv run registry validate
```

The CI runs on every PR and push, ensuring:
- All tests pass
- Registry is valid
- No duplicates
- All plugins accessible

---

## Website Integration

### Serving the Registry

**Simple approach - proxy to GitHub:**

```python
# In Flask/Django app
import requests
from datetime import datetime, timedelta
from pathlib import Path

REGISTRY_URL = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/metabrainz/picard-plugins-registry/main/plugins.json"
CACHE_FILE = "/tmp/plugins_registry.json"
CACHE_TTL = 3600  # 1 hour

def get_registry():
    """Get registry JSON with caching"""
    cache_path = Path(CACHE_FILE)

    # Check cache
    if cache_path.exists():
        age = datetime.now().timestamp() - cache_path.stat().st_mtime
        if age < CACHE_TTL:
            with open(cache_path) as f:
                return f.read()

    # Fetch from GitHub
    response = requests.get(REGISTRY_URL, timeout=10)
    response.raise_for_status()

    # Cache it
    with open(cache_path, 'w') as f:
        f.write(response.text)

    return response.text

@app.route('/api/v3/plugins.json')
def plugins_json():
    """Serve plugin registry"""
    data = get_registry()
    return Response(data, mimetype='application/json')
```

---

## Plugin Submission Process

### Via Pull Request (Recommended)

```
1. Developer forks picard-plugins-registry
2. Developer runs:
   uv sync
   source .venv/bin/activate
   registry plugin add https://github.com/me/my-plugin --trust community --categories metadata
3. Developer creates PR with the change
4. CI validates:
   - JSON is valid
   - Plugin URL is accessible
   - MANIFEST.toml is valid
   - No duplicates (UUID, URL, ID)
   - Trust level is valid
5. Picard team reviews PR
6. Picard team merges
7. Plugin appears in registry within 1 hour (cache refresh)
```

### Via Web Form (Future)

```
1. Developer submits form on picard.musicbrainz.org
2. Website validates input
3. Website creates PR automatically via GitHub API
4. Same validation and review process
5. Picard team merges
```

---

## Benefits of Git-Based Approach

1. **No Database**
   - No database to maintain, backup, or migrate
   - Git is the database

2. **Version Control**
   - Full history of all changes
   - Easy rollback (git revert)
   - Audit trail built-in

3. **Simple Deployment**
   - Website just serves static JSON
   - Can use CDN for plugins.json
   - No database connection needed

4. **Collaboration**
   - PRs for plugin submissions
   - Review process via GitHub
   - Community can submit PRs
   - Automated validation via CI

5. **Transparency**
   - Public repository
   - Anyone can see registry contents
   - Anyone can propose changes

6. **Reliability**
   - Git is the source of truth
   - GitHub provides hosting and CDN
   - Simple backup (git clone)

7. **Scalability**
   - Static JSON can be CDN-cached
   - Expected scale: <1000 plugins

---

## Code Sharing with Picard

### Shared Code

The registry tool copies validation code from Picard:

**registry_lib/picard/constants.py** (~60 lines)
- Copy from `picard/plugin3/constants.py`
- Trust levels, categories, required fields

**registry_lib/picard/validator.py** (~120 lines)
- Copy from `picard/plugin3/validator.py`
- Standalone validation function
- Modified imports to use relative imports (`.constants`)

Total: ~180 lines

### Keeping in Sync

- MANIFEST format is stable (changes are rare)
- When format changes, copy updated files from Picard
- Files are designed to be copied with minimal modification

---

## See Also

- **[REGISTRY.md](REGISTRY.md)** - Registry JSON schema and client integration
- **[MANIFEST.md](MANIFEST.md)** - MANIFEST.toml specification
- **[SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md)** - Security model

Commit message:

docs: add TODO for picard.musicbrainz.org registry endpoint
Add reminder to implement /registry/plugins.json endpoint as fallback.

docs/PLUGINSV3/WEBSITE.md, after:

# Website Plugin Registry Implementation

This document describes the server-side implementation for the plugin registry using a git-based approach.

---

## Overview

The plugin registry uses a **git repository as the database**. No traditional database is needed - the registry is a JSON file in a git repository, managed by a CLI tool.

**Key principle:** Git is the source of truth.

---

## Architecture

### Components

1. **picard-plugins-registry** (Git repository)
   - Contains `plugins.json` (the registry)
   - CLI tool to manipulate registry
   - Validation scripts
   - CI/CD for validation

2. **picard.musicbrainz.org** (Website)
   - Serves `plugins.json` at `/api/v3/plugins.json`
   - Displays plugin browser (HTML pages)
   - Fetches from GitHub (cached)

3. **Picard Client**
   - Downloads `plugins.json` from website
   - Caches locally
   - Uses for plugin discovery and blacklist checking

### Data Flow

```
1. Admin runs: registry plugin add <url> --trust community
   ↓
2. CLI updates plugins.json in local git repo
   ↓
3. Admin commits and pushes to GitHub
   ↓
4. GitHub hosts the JSON file
   ↓
5. Website fetches from GitHub (cached)
   ↓
6. Website serves at /api/v3/plugins.json
   ↓
7. Picard downloads and caches
```

---

## Repository Structure

### picard-plugins-registry

```
picard-plugins-registry/
├── plugins.json              # The registry (generated/managed)
├── registry_lib/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── cli.py               # CLI argument parsing
│   ├── registry.py          # Registry file management
│   ├── plugin.py            # Plugin operations
│   ├── blacklist.py         # Blacklist operations
│   ├── manifest.py          # MANIFEST.toml fetching/parsing
│   ├── utils.py             # Utilities (derive_plugin_id, timestamps)
│   └── picard/              # Files copied from Picard
│       ├── constants.py     # Trust levels, categories
│       └── validator.py     # MANIFEST validation
├── tests/                    # Unit tests
├── pyproject.toml           # Python project config (uv)
├── uv.lock                  # Dependency lock file
├── README.md
└── .github/
    └── workflows/
        └── ci.yml           # CI validation
```

**Note:** `constants.py` and `validator.py` are copied from Picard to keep the tool standalone.

---

## Registry CLI Tool

### Command Structure

```bash
# Plugin management
registry plugin add <git-url> --trust <level> [--categories <cats>] [--refs <refs>]
registry plugin update <plugin-id> [--ref <ref>]
registry plugin edit <plugin-id> [--trust <level>] [--categories <cats>] [--git-url <url>]
registry plugin redirect <plugin-id> <old-url> [--remove] [--list]
registry plugin remove <plugin-id>
registry plugin list [--trust <level>] [--category <cat>] [--verbose]
registry plugin show <plugin-id>

# Ref management (separate from plugin)
registry ref add <plugin-id> <ref-name> [--description <desc>] [--min-api-version <ver>] [--max-api-version <ver>]
registry ref edit <plugin-id> <ref-name> [--name <new-name>] [--description <desc>] [--min-api-version <ver>] [--max-api-version <ver>]
registry ref remove <plugin-id> <ref-name>
registry ref list <plugin-id>

# Blacklist management
registry blacklist add [--url <url>] [--uuid <uuid>] [--url-regex <pattern>] --reason <reason>
registry blacklist remove [--url <url>] [--uuid <uuid>]
registry blacklist list
registry blacklist show [--url <url>] [--uuid <uuid>]

# Utilities
registry validate
registry stats
```

### Usage Examples

**Add a plugin:**
```bash
cd picard-plugins-registry

# Add new community plugin (uses default ref: main)
registry plugin add https://github.com/user/awesome-plugin \
    --trust community \
    --categories metadata

# Output:
# Fetching MANIFEST.toml from https://github.com/user/awesome-plugin (ref: main)...
# Plugin: Awesome Plugin
# UUID: 12345678-1234-4234-8234-123456789abc
# Authors: John Doe
# API: 3.0
#
# Added plugin 'awesome-plugin' to registry

# Add plugin with custom branch
registry plugin add https://github.com/user/old-plugin \
    --trust community \
    --refs master

# Add plugin with multiple refs and API versions
registry plugin add https://github.com/user/multi-version-plugin \
    --trust community \
    --refs 'main:4.0,picard-v3:3.0-3.99'

# The registry will contain:
{
  "refs": [
    {
      "name": "main",
      "min_api_version": "4.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "picard-v3",
      "min_api_version": "3.0",
      "max_api_version": "3.99"
    }
  ]
}

# Validate
registry validate

# Commit
git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Add plugin: Awesome Plugin"
git push
```

**Update plugin metadata:**
```bash
# Update from default ref (first ref or main)
registry plugin update awesome-plugin

# Update from specific ref
registry plugin update awesome-plugin --ref develop

# Note: UUID must match or update will fail
```

**Edit plugin:**
```bash
# Change trust level
registry plugin edit awesome-plugin --trust trusted

# Change categories
registry plugin edit awesome-plugin --categories metadata,ui

# Change git URL (when plugin permanently moves)
registry plugin edit awesome-plugin --git-url https://github.com/neworg/awesome-plugin

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Promote awesome-plugin to trusted"
git push
```

**Manage refs:**
```bash
# Add a ref
registry ref add awesome-plugin develop \
    --description "Development branch" \
    --min-api-version "4.0"

# Edit ref (update description, API versions, or rename)
registry ref edit awesome-plugin develop --max-api-version "4.99"
registry ref edit awesome-plugin develop --name beta

# List refs
registry ref list awesome-plugin

# Remove ref
registry ref remove awesome-plugin develop

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Add develop ref to awesome-plugin"
git push
```

**Manage redirects:**
```bash
# Add redirect when plugin moves
registry plugin redirect awesome-plugin https://github.com/olduser/old-repo

# List redirects
registry plugin redirect awesome-plugin --list

# Remove redirect
registry plugin redirect awesome-plugin https://github.com/olduser/old-repo --remove

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Add redirect for moved plugin"
git push
```

**Blacklist a plugin:**
```bash
# Blacklist by UUID (recommended - blocks plugin at all URLs)
registry blacklist add --uuid 12345678-1234-4234-8234-123456789abc \
    --reason "Malicious plugin"

# Blacklist by URL
registry blacklist add --url https://github.com/badactor/malware \
    --reason "Contains malicious code"

# Blacklist entire organization
registry blacklist add --url-regex "^https://github\\.com/badorg/.*" \
    --reason "Compromised account"

git add plugins.json
git commit -m "Blacklist malicious plugin"
git push
```

---

## Implementation Details

### Key Files

**registry_lib/plugin.py:**
- `add_plugin()` - Add plugin with duplicate checking (UUID, URL, ID)
- `update_plugin()` - Refresh metadata from MANIFEST with UUID validation
- `_parse_refs()` - Parse refs string (e.g., "main:4.0,picard-v3:3.0-3.99")
- `_sync_optional_fields()` - Helper for optional MANIFEST fields

**registry_lib/registry.py:**
- `Registry` class - Load/save JSON, find plugins, sort by ID
- `add_plugin()` - Append plugin to registry
- `remove_plugin()` - Remove plugin by ID
- `add_blacklist()` / `remove_blacklist()` - Manage blacklist

**registry_lib/manifest.py:**
- `fetch_manifest()` - Fetch MANIFEST.toml from GitHub raw URL
- `validate_manifest()` - Validate using Picard's validator

**registry_lib/utils.py:**
- `derive_plugin_id()` - Derive ID from git URL (removes prefixes)
- `now_iso8601()` - Generate ISO 8601 timestamps with Z suffix

**registry_lib/cli.py:**
- `get_plugin_or_exit()` - Helper for plugin lookup with error handling
- Command functions for all CLI operations
- Argument parsing with argparse

### Duplicate Detection

When adding a plugin, the system checks for duplicates:

1. **Git URL** - Most direct duplicate (same repository)
2. **UUID** - Prevents same plugin at different URLs
3. **Plugin ID** - Prevents derived ID collisions

All checks include the existing plugin ID in error messages for clarity.

### Validation

The `validate` command checks:
- JSON syntax
- Duplicate IDs, UUIDs, URLs
- Required fields present
- Trust levels valid
- Categories valid

### Testing

- 53 unit tests covering all operations
- Tests use temporary registry files
- Mock MANIFEST fetching for speed
- Pre-commit hooks run tests automatically

---

## CI/CD Validation

### GitHub Actions Workflow

```yaml
# .github/workflows/ci.yml
name: CI

on:
  pull_request:
  push:
    branches: [main]

jobs:
  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - uses: astral-sh/setup-uv@v3

      - name: Install dependencies
        run: uv sync

      - name: Run tests
        run: uv run pytest

      - name: Validate registry
        run: uv run registry validate
```

The CI runs on every PR and push, ensuring:
- All tests pass
- Registry is valid
- No duplicates
- All plugins accessible

---

## Website Integration

**TODO:** Implement `https://picard.musicbrainz.org/registry/plugins.json` endpoint as fallback for the GitHub URL. This provides:
- Resilience if GitHub is unavailable or blocked
- Ability to intentionally remove GitHub file to force all clients to use proxy
- Control over caching headers and rate limiting
- Analytics on registry usage

### Serving the Registry

**Simple approach - proxy to GitHub:**

```python
# In Flask/Django app
import requests
from datetime import datetime, timedelta
from pathlib import Path

REGISTRY_URL = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/metabrainz/picard-plugins-registry/main/plugins.json"
CACHE_FILE = "/tmp/plugins_registry.json"
CACHE_TTL = 3600  # 1 hour

def get_registry():
    """Get registry JSON with caching"""
    cache_path = Path(CACHE_FILE)

    # Check cache
    if cache_path.exists():
        age = datetime.now().timestamp() - cache_path.stat().st_mtime
        if age < CACHE_TTL:
            with open(cache_path) as f:
                return f.read()

    # Fetch from GitHub
    response = requests.get(REGISTRY_URL, timeout=10)
    response.raise_for_status()

    # Cache it
    with open(cache_path, 'w') as f:
        f.write(response.text)

    return response.text

@app.route('/api/v3/plugins.json')
def plugins_json():
    """Serve plugin registry"""
    data = get_registry()
    return Response(data, mimetype='application/json')
```

---

## Plugin Submission Process

### Via Pull Request (Recommended)

```
1. Developer forks picard-plugins-registry
2. Developer runs:
   uv sync
   source .venv/bin/activate
   registry plugin add https://github.com/me/my-plugin --trust community --categories metadata
3. Developer creates PR with the change
4. CI validates:
   - JSON is valid
   - Plugin URL is accessible
   - MANIFEST.toml is valid
   - No duplicates (UUID, URL, ID)
   - Trust level is valid
5. Picard team reviews PR
6. Picard team merges
7. Plugin appears in registry within 1 hour (cache refresh)
```

### Via Web Form (Future)

```
1. Developer submits form on picard.musicbrainz.org
2. Website validates input
3. Website creates PR automatically via GitHub API
4. Same validation and review process
5. Picard team merges
```

---

## Benefits of Git-Based Approach

1. **No Database**
   - No database to maintain, backup, or migrate
   - Git is the database

2. **Version Control**
   - Full history of all changes
   - Easy rollback (git revert)
   - Audit trail built-in

3. **Simple Deployment**
   - Website just serves static JSON
   - Can use CDN for plugins.json
   - No database connection needed

4. **Collaboration**
   - PRs for plugin submissions
   - Review process via GitHub
   - Community can submit PRs
   - Automated validation via CI

5. **Transparency**
   - Public repository
   - Anyone can see registry contents
   - Anyone can propose changes

6. **Reliability**
   - Git is the source of truth
   - GitHub provides hosting and CDN
   - Simple backup (git clone)

7. **Scalability**
   - Static JSON can be CDN-cached
   - Expected scale: <1000 plugins

---

## Code Sharing with Picard

### Shared Code

The registry tool copies validation code from Picard:

**registry_lib/picard/constants.py** (~60 lines)
- Copy from `picard/plugin3/constants.py`
- Trust levels, categories, required fields

**registry_lib/picard/validator.py** (~120 lines)
- Copy from `picard/plugin3/validator.py`
- Standalone validation function
- Modified imports to use relative imports (`.constants`)

Total: ~180 lines

### Keeping in Sync

- MANIFEST format is stable (changes are rare)
- When format changes, copy updated files from Picard
- Files are designed to be copied with minimal modification

---

## See Also

- **[REGISTRY.md](REGISTRY.md)** - Registry JSON schema and client integration
- **[MANIFEST.md](MANIFEST.md)** - MANIFEST.toml specification
- **[SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md)** - Security model
